Okay, now we have done configuring ip address
on router 1 and router 2.
Next in this video, we are going to configure routing so all pc
will able to communicate with all servers.
For now, all pc should not able to communicate
with servers. Why? Because router 1 don’t have a
route to go to server, and router 2 also don’t
have a route to go to the pc. Let’s check it.
Do show ip route, here we can see that
router 1 only have route to 10.10.10.0/30,
vlan 10, vlan 20, and vlan 30, router 1
don’t have a route to go to the server yet.
Let’s also check on router 2, do show ip route,
here we can see that router 2 only have route
about 10.10.10.0/30 and 192.168.1.0/24,
router 2 don’t have a route to go
to vlan 10, vlan 20, and vlan 30.
This is why we need to configure
routing on router 1 and router 2.
You are free to use any routing protocol,
you can use static routing, eigrp, or ospf.
But in this case, I will use ospf. Let’s
start with router 1. Router ospf 1,
let’s advertise all connected network, here router 1 have
4 connected network, let’s start with 10.10.10.0,
so network 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.3 area 0, remember
that for prefix /30, the wildcard bits is 0.0.0.3,
next let’s advertise the network of all vlan.
Let’s start with vlan 10, network 192.168.10.0
0.0.0.255 area 0, next for vlan 20,
network 192.168.20.0 0.0.0.255 area 0, last for
vlan 30, network 192.168.30.0 0.0.0.255 area 0.
Okay now we have done configuring ospf on
router 1, next let’s configure ospf on router 2.
Router ospf and then the id, you are free to
use any number, in this case I will also use 1.
Next let’s advertise all connected network,
in this case, router 2 have 2 connected network,
let’s start with 10.10.10.0 first,
so network 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.3 area 0,
next let’s advertise the network that connected
to server, network 192.168.1.0 0.0.0.255 area 0.
Okay now we have done configuring
ospf on router 1 and router 2.
Let’s check the routing table, let’s check on
router 1 first, do show ip route,
here we can see that router 1 already have route to go to the
server, and the label is O, this is means ospf.
Let’s also check on router 2, do show ip
route, here we can see that router 2 also
have route to vlan 10, 20, and 30. And
the label is also O, this is means ospf.
So now, all pc should be able to
communicate with all servers. Let’s test it.
Vlan 20 to server 1, failed, test again,
and success, vlan 30 to server 1, success,
vlan 10 to server 2, failed, test again,
okay here success, vlan 10 to server 3,
failed, test again, okay this is also success.
Okay so now all pc is able to
communicate with all servers.
I think enough for this video, in the next video,
we are going to start learning about access list.
Thankyou for watching and
see you on the next video.